Javier, I would love you to tell us what are, in your opinion, from all the experience you have,
what are the main criteria that investors have in mind to make the decision whether to invest or not in a startup?
Correct. The first is whether the startup is investable and this is the ABC, that is, as investors you invest in a type of companies that,
if today they are of size 1, in a period of 5 or 7 years I hope they have a minimum size 10, that is, they are hyper-growth companies.
But then when we really start to look at what are the valuation criteria, I really like the framework that Poynt and Capital told people,
which said that it was the 5 Ts, although then it really is 4 Ts plus one weird thing.
The first, and I think it is one thing that we all investors say, the team, the team, is absolutely key.
Really, the basis of any business is the team and this is something that is very easy to say and it is very difficult as an investor to analyze.
Because it is not just about knowing that it is a valued team with people, technology.
So for me the very key issue when you are analyzing a team is also to understand the dynamics of the team very well.
For example, when we talk about methodologies, we talk about the famous product market fit, how the product fits into the market.
I always say that the founder product market fit is missing, or the team product market fit.
Because really the question you ask as an investor is whether this is the best team to launch a project.
And that is not only based on their experiences, but also on their knowledge of the sector, etc.
Yes, indeed, we receive many proposals, more and more.
And in many cases they are things that you say may make some sense, but there is no fit in that.
It is not a project for you, and maybe that person is capable of doing other very valuable things, but not that in particular.
He may lack networking, he may lack experience, he may lack the knowledge of the business in general, etc.
Correct, the ability to take that project to the next level and in the end we are investing in people who generate that ability to grow.
The other element that is absolutely clear for an investor is if we are really talking about wanting a company to be able to grow at least 10 or 100 times in a period of 5 years.
It is that it has a market size that supports it.
The market is absolutely key.
The Americans who name everything, call it the TAM-SAM-SOM.
The total addressable market, the total addressable market.
The SAM would be the serviceable available market, that is, the market to which you can reach with the current knowledge model.
And the SOM would be the serviceable obtainable market, which is what you are going to do now, which is what you have.
I always say, the silly example of this is, I am doing, for example, electric scooters or electric cars or electric motorcycles.
So my SOM right now is the ability I have to produce for X years and sell X.
The SAM would be the total market of electric cars or electric motorcycles.
And the TAM would be the total market.
It is very important to explain it with those three steps, because it is very easy to see the growth capacity of a market.
Then, technology is absolutely key.
When I say technology, people are very much left with the idea of ​​digital.
It is not digital, it is technology.
In the end, what makes a project different is that technology, which we see now has an important impact on others.
A team with solid technology is much easier to believe and much easier to achieve that it is investable than a team that does not have technology below.
In fact, we increasingly look at the technological component, and there are hard barriers, etc.
Then, all this, if you put it in a cocktail shaker, a good team that is attacking a good market with technology, etc.
If it has done well, it must have traction metrics.
That is, it must make the business grow little by little and there must be evidence that it is like that.
And I really like what Marek Fodor said, that this goes in order.
Euros, users, press.
That is, what do I do?
In the end, it is very common for companies to say, I have won a prize or I have come out in the middle.
All this is very good, but what really worries an investor is, first, the maximum valuation of something is that someone gives you 1 euro.
The difference between a penny and zero is infinite.
Someone has been cheated, with all the commas, to pay.
I love what you say because we have seen it on many occasions.
There are many entrepreneurs who, in the first phases, seem to be looking for that recognition, to come out in the middle, to be awarded a prize by a financial entity, etc.
And that hype sometimes even clouds them.
And really the only important thing is what the customers say, that they show it to you if they buy.
Completely. In the end, validation is when someone buys you.
And it is very good, and there is a certain encouragement by many entrepreneurs to be recognized by other entrepreneurs, but that is garbage.
In the end, who has to recognize your business are your customers.
I am ultra drastic in that.
You just have to trust what the customers say, because even what the gurus around you tell you is not worth it at all.
If they take the product to the market, if they pay you for it, it is the best validation there is.
And everything else is a siren song that can confuse you.
And finally, and perhaps the most difficult to analyze, but the one that really makes an investor understand it in a completely different way, is what Warren Buffett calls the Modes.
The pitfalls, that is, the differential advantage, those barriers that you are going to have in the face of competition.
And this is something that, unfortunately, is the most difficult to nail, but it is what makes a project really more investable.
There is a very obvious barrier, I have intellectual property, we have patented things.
That is easy, but it is not applicable to many businesses.
But, for example, we have designed a technology that does not exist in the sector at the moment.
Or we are using an absolutely disruptive business model.
Many people do not know that when there was an area in England, where there was a huge whale hunting, and there were many places competing to hunt whales.
And who took the cat to the water was this area.
And this area was not because it had the best technology, the best harpoons, it was because they used a different business model.
A business model that, by the way, is now the father of venture capital.
In 1850, a risk distribution scheme was decided, like the one we have in venture capital.
And it was what made that area the largest part of whale hunting.
That is a mode, that is a differential advantage.
It is not necessary that you are thinking that you are going to do space technology.
I understand that the advantage or the barrier, which is sometimes the same from a different perspective,
I understand that sometimes what you value is the ability to generate the nuclear at that time.
But in the end, the reality is that the moments we invest depend.
The ideal would be that a company was already doing this, but there is a movement with a certain reason that says that it is neither capital nor risk.
Here it is about taking risks.
Taking risks also happens because I believe that this team is capable of generating that barrier with technology, etc.
It is about, if you think about it, five elements that are not elements that you analyze in a vacuum,
but that are absolutely interrelated and that the combination of the five is what makes a good project.
Indeed. I'm going to make a wrap-up of what you've said.
The first thing you said is that there is a criterion, and that is that the expectations have to be that at least the company is worth ten times more.
In a period of, how many have you said?
Five or seven years.
Five or seven years, in the orientative.
And you have used a model of analysis that are the five T's, which starts with the team, which is the team, which is something absolutely vital, that everyone says.
As you said, you have incorporated a concept that is very interesting, which is the one before the product market fit,
which is the fit between the team and the idea, in a way.
You were talking about the size of the market, the TAU, the technology, the attraction that that team has achieved with that technology,
and then the market.
That is where the evidence is generated that all that idea makes sense.
I think that attraction contributes to the perception of risk, or the risk of the project,
decreases a lot as you have been validating or demonstrating things.
And finally, you were talking about the modes, which are the pit, the barrier of entry, or the differential advantage, etc.
Correct, that's right.
Perfect.
Thank you.